.TH ilc 1 "Viper" "Viper ilc" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ilc \- Viper IL compiler, runner, and utilities
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ilc
 [\-\-version] [\-h] <command> [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ilc
is the primary command for working with Viper IL. It can parse IL text,
verify modules, run them on the VM, perform simple optimization pipelines,
and drive frontends.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B run <file.il> [--trace]
Parse and run the given IL file on the VM. Returns the program's exit value.
.TP
.B il-opt <file.il> [--pipeline <name>]
Run one or more optimization/analysis passes over the input IL and print the
resulting module to stdout. Pipelines are documented in project docs.
.TP
.B front basic --emit-il <file.bas>
Use the BASIC frontend to compile a .bas file to IL text on stdout.
.TP
.B codegen x64 [--emit-asm|--assemble] <file.il>
Lower the IL to x86_64 assembly (-\-emit-asm) or assemble it (-\-assemble)
when the toolchain is available. Assembly/link steps are host dependent.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version and build information (ilc version, IL spec version).
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show usage and the list of available commands.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success; non-zero on errors (parsing, verification, runtime, or
I/O failures).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Run an IL file on the VM:
.RS
.nf
ilc run examples/hello.il
.fi
.RE
.PP
Optimize an IL file with a default pipeline:
.RS
.nf
ilc il-opt examples/loop.il --pipeline simplifycfg
.fi
.RE
.PP
Compile BASIC to IL:
.RS
.nf
ilc front basic --emit-il examples/hello.bas > hello.il
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR il\-verify (1),
.BR il\-dis (1)
