.TH viper 1 "Viper" "viper" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
viper \- Viper project driver, IL tool, and native build frontend
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B viper
\fBrun\fR [\fItarget\fR] [\fIoptions\fR] [\fB--verify-each\fR] [\fB--time-compile\fR] [\fB--\fR \fIprogram-args...\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBbuild\fR [\fItarget\fR] [\fB-o\fR \fIoutput\fR] [\fIoptions\fR] [\fB--verify-each\fR] [\fB--time-compile\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBcheck\fR [\fItarget\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBinit\fR \fIproject-name\fR [\fB--lang\fR zia|basic]
.br
.B viper
\fBrepl\fR [zia|basic]
.br
.B viper
\fBeval\fR [\fB--lang\fR zia|basic] [\fB--json\fR] [\fB--type\fR] [\fB--il\fR] [\fIcode\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBexplain\fR \fIdiagnostic-code\fR [\fB--json\fR] | \fBexplain --list\fR [\fB--json\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBpackage\fR [\fItarget\fR] [\fB--target\fR macos|linux|windows|tarball]
[\fB--arch\fR arm64|x64] [\fB-o\fR \fIoutput\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBinstall-package\fR [\fB--target\fR windows|macos|linux-deb|linux-rpm|linux-bundle|tarball|all|all-available]
[\fB--build-dir\fR \fIDIR\fR|\fB--stage-dir\fR \fIDIR\fR|\fB--verify-only\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB--arch\fR arm64|x64] [\fB--stage-only\fR] [\fB--keep-stage-dir\fR]
[\fB--macos-pkg-version\fR \fIVERSION\fR] [\fB--macos-sign-identity\fR \fIIDENTITY\fR]
[\fB--macos-notary-profile\fR \fIPROFILE\fR] [\fB--macos-staple\fR]
[\fB--no-verify\fR] [\fB-o\fR \fIOUTPUT\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fB-run\fR \fIFILE.il\fR [\fIrun-options\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBfront zia\fR \fB-emit-il\fR \fIFILE.zia\fR [\fB--bounds-checks\fR] [\fB--no-runtime-namespaces\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBfront zia\fR \fB-run\fR \fIFILE.zia\fR [\fIrun-options\fR] [\fB--debug-vm\fR] [\fB--no-runtime-namespaces\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBfront basic\fR \fB-emit-il\fR \fIFILE.bas\fR [\fB--bounds-checks\fR] [\fB--no-runtime-namespaces\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBfront basic\fR \fB-run\fR \fIFILE.bas\fR [\fIrun-options\fR] [\fB--debug-vm\fR] [\fB--no-runtime-namespaces\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBcodegen\fR x64 \fIin.il\fR [\fB-S\fR \fIout.s\fR] [\fB-o\fR \fIexe|obj\fR] [\fB--run-native\fR] [\fB--debug-lines\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBcodegen\fR arm64 \fIin.il\fR [\fB-S\fR \fIout.s\fR] [\fB-o\fR \fIexe|obj\fR] [\fB--run-native\fR] [\fB--debug-lines\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fBil-opt\fR \fIin.il\fR \fB-o\fR \fIout.il\fR [\fB--pipeline\fR O0|O1|O2]
[\fB--passes\fR p1,p2] [\fB-print-before\fR] [\fB-print-after\fR] [\fB-verify-each\fR]
[\fB--pass-stats\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fB--print-error-codes\fR [\fB--json\fR]
.br
.B viper
\fB--dump-runtime-api\fR | \fB--dump-opcodes\fR
.br
.B viper
\fB--version\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBviper\fR is the main user-facing driver for Zia, BASIC, textual IL, and native
build/package workflows.
.PP
\fItarget\fR may be a \fC.zia\fR file, \fC.bas\fR file, directory, or
\fCviper.project\fR path. If omitted, the current directory is used.
.PP
\fBbuild\fR detects the frontend from the target. With no \fB-o\fR it emits IL to
stdout. With \fB-o output.il\fR it writes textual IL. With any other output name
it builds a native executable.
.PP
\fBrun\fR builds and runs a Zia or BASIC target. Legacy IL, Zia, and BASIC entry
points remain available through \fB-run\fR, \fBfront zia\fR, and \fBfront basic\fR.
.PP
\fBcheck\fR type-checks and verifies a target without running or emitting
anything. Exit codes: 0 no errors, 1 usage/target error, 2 compile or
verification errors. Combine with \fB--diagnostic-format json\fR for
machine-readable diagnostics including fix-its.
.PP
\fBeval\fR evaluates a single Zia or BASIC snippet through a fresh REPL session
(stdin is read when no code argument is given). \fB--json\fR emits a structured
result object; \fB--type\fR and \fB--il\fR add the inferred type and generated
IL for Zia snippets. Exit codes: 0 success, 1 usage, 2 compile/eval error,
3 runtime trap.
.PP
\fBexplain\fR describes a diagnostic code from the central catalog
(\fB--list\fR prints everything; \fB--print-error-codes\fR is the flag form).
\fB--dump-runtime-api\fR and \fB--dump-opcodes\fR emit JSON inventories of the
runtime surface and IL opcode set generated from the live registries.
.PP
\fBpackage\fR builds native app artifacts. Manifest paths are project-relative,
while \fB--executable\fR paths are resolved from the current working directory
when relative. Default output filenames are sanitized so project metadata cannot
create nested or parent-directory paths. Asset traversal fails on unreadable
entries and symlinks that resolve outside the project root. Windows app
installers overwrite packaged files without deleting unrelated files in an
existing install root.
.PP
\fBinstall-package\fR packages the Viper toolchain itself from a staged
\fCcmake --install\fR tree. It can stage from a build tree automatically,
validate the staged install, emit native installer artifacts, or structurally
verify an existing installer file.
.PP
For staged toolchain packaging, \fBinstall-package\fR requires a detected Viper
version, detects platform and architecture from the staged \fCviper\fR binary
when possible, including \fCuniversal\fR for macOS fat32 and fat64 Mach-O payloads, and
rejects native package targets that do not match that staged platform.
\fB--target all\fR emits the staged platform's native package type plus a
portable tarball; on Linux it emits Debian, RPM, and the self-extracting
\fC.run\fR bundle, and fails if \fCrpmbuild\fR is not
available so release builds do not silently skip an expected artifact.
\fB--target all-available\fR skips Linux RPM when \fCrpmbuild\fR is absent. Use
\fB--macos-pkg-version\fR when the Viper version has suffixes that cannot be
represented as a dotted numeric macOS package version. macOS toolchain packages
are native XAR/CPIO product packages that install under \fC/usr/local/viper\fR,
add receipt-owned command and manpage symlinks under \fC/usr/local\fR, install a
LaunchServices handler app for \fC.zia\fR, \fC.bas\fR, and \fC.il\fR files, provide
\fC/usr/local/viper/share/viper/uninstall.sh\fR for local cleanup, signs nested
code with \fB--macos-app-sign-identity\fR, and can sign the product with \fB--macos-sign-identity\fR, notarize with
\fB--macos-notary-profile\fR, and stapled with \fB--macos-staple\fR. With
\fB--macos-dmg\fR, the generated DMG is verified and can be notarized/stapled
with the same notary options. Generated
Windows toolchain installers default to a per-user install under
\fC%LocalAppData%\\Viper\fR, add the installed \fCbin\fR directory to the user
\fCPath\fR, avoid duplicate Viper-owned PATH entries on reinstall, remove only
that PATH token on uninstall, stage and verify a DEFLATE-compressed inner
payload in a journaled transaction, reject reparse traversal and unowned
collisions, restore files/PATH/registry on failure or interruption, remove only
stale Viper-owned files after commit, and create Start
Menu developer shortcuts and source/IL file associations by default. Use
\fB--windows-install-scope machine\fR for a \fC%ProgramFiles%\\Viper\fR install,
\fB--windows-no-path\fR to leave PATH untouched, \fB--windows-shortcuts off\fR
to omit shortcuts, and \fB--windows-file-associations off\fR to skip
source/IL file associations; when enabled, associations use the appropriate
\fBviper run\fR or \fBviper -run\fR command. Windows installer generation rejects MSVC Debug CRT
payloads unless \fB--allow-debug-toolchain\fR is supplied; Release payloads that
use the MSVC dynamic runtime require the Visual C++ Redistributable unless the
runtime DLLs are staged next to \fCbin\\viper.exe\fR or the toolchain is built
with a static runtime. Linux toolchain
packages include desktop/MIME association metadata, hicolor icons, preserve
staged Unix modes, declare runtime package dependencies for libc/C++/libgcc and
optional X11/ALSA support. CMake, make, a C++ compiler,
\fCdesktop-file-utils\fR, \fCshared-mime-info\fR, and \fCman-db\fR are package
recommendations for developer workflows rather than hard runtime dependencies.
Linux toolchain tarballs include \fCinstall.sh\fR, \fCuninstall.sh\fR, and an install
manifest; the scripts honor \fCPREFIX\fR and \fCDESTDIR\fR, remove stale files from
the previous manifest in a rollback-capable transaction, reject unowned
conflicts, and remove only files listed in the current manifest during uninstall.
Every successful toolchain package writes a SHA-256 sidecar and JSON inventory;
multi-artifact output also writes \fCSHA256SUMS\fR. \fB--release\fR requires
numeric \fCSOURCE_DATE_EPOCH\fR, verification, collision-free output, and the
native platform trust chain. Use \fB--require-checksum\fR with
\fB--verify-only\fR to enforce the sidecar.
.SH BUILD AND RUN OPTIONS
These options apply to \fBviper run\fR and \fBviper build\fR when relevant, and
to legacy run modes where noted.
.TP
\fB--trace\fR[=\fIil\fR|\fIsrc\fR]
Enable execution tracing.
.TP
\fB--stdin-from\fR \fIFILE\fR
Redirect stdin from \fIFILE\fR.
.TP
\fB--max-steps\fR \fIN\fR
Limit executed instructions; 0 disables the limit.
.TP
\fB--bounds-checks\fR
Enable runtime bounds checks.
.TP
\fB--dump-trap\fR
Show detailed trap diagnostics.
.TP
\fB--debug-vm\fR
Enable VM debug mode.
.TP
\fB--build-profile\fR debug|balanced|release
Select a build profile. Profiles map to \fBO0\fR, \fBO1\fR, and \fBO2\fR respectively.
.TP
\fB-O0\fR, \fB-O1\fR, \fB-O2\fR
Select optimization level. Explicit \fB-O\fR flags override the build profile.
.TP
\fB--arch\fR arm64|x64
Override the native build architecture.
.TP
\fB--verify-each\fR
Verify IL after each optimizer pass. This is useful for pass debugging and is disabled by default.
.TP
\fB--time-compile\fR
Print compile phase timings and per-pass optimizer statistics.
.TP
\fB--no-runtime-namespaces\fR
Disable runtime namespace emission in generated IL.
.SH DIAGNOSTIC OPTIONS
.TP
\fB--dump-tokens\fR
Dump frontend tokens.
.TP
\fB--dump-ast\fR
Dump the parsed AST.
.TP
\fB--dump-sema-ast\fR
Dump the post-semantics AST.
.TP
\fB--dump-il\fR
Dump generated IL before execution or codegen.
.TP
\fB--dump-il-opt\fR
Dump optimized IL.
.TP
\fB--dump-il-passes\fR
Dump IL after individual optimization passes.
.SH LEGACY IL RUN OPTIONS
These options apply to \fBviper -run\fR and legacy BASIC run mode:
.TP
\fB--break\fR \fILABEL\fR|\fIFILE:LINE\fR
Set a breakpoint by IL label or source location.
.TP
\fB--break-src\fR \fIFILE:LINE\fR
Set a source breakpoint.
.TP
\fB--watch\fR \fINAME\fR
Watch a variable and log stores.
.TP
\fB--count\fR
Show per-opcode execution counts.
.TP
\fB--time\fR
Show wall-clock runtime.
.SH CODEGEN OPTIONS
See SYNOPSIS for target-specific forms. \fB--run-native\fR builds and runs the
produced executable when toolchains are configured. The native assembler is the
default; \fB--debug-lines\fR opts into DWARF line-table emission.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run a Zia project from the current directory
.nf
viper run
.fi
.TP
Build a Zia source file to native output
.nf
viper build hello.zia -o hello
.fi
.TP
Emit IL for a BASIC file
.nf
viper build prog.bas -o prog.il
.fi
.TP
Start a Zia REPL
.nf
viper repl zia
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success; non-zero on argument, I/O, parse, verification, build, or
runtime errors.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBzia\fR(1), \fBvbasic\fR(1), \fBilrun\fR(1), \fBil-verify\fR(1)
