.TH zia 1 "Viper" "zia" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zia \- compile or run Zia source files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zia
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIFILE.zia\fR [\fB--\fR \fIprogram-args...\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBzia\fR is the single-file Zia driver. It runs Zia source through the Zia
frontend and either executes the program or emits textual IL.
.PP
Zia source files must begin with a module declaration such as
\fCmodule Hello;\fR. For project, directory, REPL, native-build, and packaging
workflows, use \fBviper\fR(1).
.SH MODES
.TP
Run (default)
\fBzia\fR \fIFILE.zia\fR
.TP
Emit IL to stdout
\fBzia\fR \fIFILE.zia\fR \fB--emit-il\fR
.TP
Emit IL to file
\fBzia\fR \fIFILE.zia\fR \fB-o\fR \fIFILE.il\fR
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-o\fR, \fB--output\fR \fIFILE\fR
Write emitted IL to \fIFILE\fR.
.TP
\fB--emit-il\fR
Emit IL instead of running the program.
.TP
\fB--trace\fR[=\fIil\fR|\fIsrc\fR]
Enable execution tracing.
.TP
\fB--bounds-checks\fR
Enable runtime bounds checks.
.TP
\fB--stdin-from\fR \fIFILE\fR
Redirect stdin from \fIFILE\fR.
.TP
\fB--max-steps\fR \fIN\fR
Limit executed instructions.
.TP
\fB--dump-trap\fR
Show detailed trap diagnostics.
.TP
\fB-Wall\fR
Enable all warnings.
.TP
\fB-Werror\fR
Treat warnings as errors.
.TP
\fB-Wno-\fR\fICODE\fR
Disable a warning by code or warning name.
.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Show command help and exit.
.TP
\fB--version\fR
Show version information and exit.
.SH NOTES
Zia uses \fBvar\fR for mutable bindings and \fBfinal\fR for immutable bindings;
\fBlet\fR is accepted as a compatibility alias for \fBfinal\fR.
.PP
\fBexpose\fR is the canonical public-visibility keyword; \fBexport\fR and
\fBpublic\fR are accepted aliases.
.PP
\fBbind\fR imports Zia modules and Viper runtime namespaces. The canonical alias
form is \fCbind Viper.Math as Math;\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run a source file
.nf
zia hello.zia
.fi
.TP
Emit IL to stdout
.nf
zia hello.zia --emit-il
.fi
.TP
Save IL to a file
.nf
zia hello.zia -o hello.il
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBviper\fR(1), \fBvbasic\fR(1), \fBilrun\fR(1)
